Optimized Baseline Architectural Shift & Updated Benchmarks (#1651)
llm-d/llm-d: guides/optimized-baseline/README.md

- **Load-aware** using both the [kv-cache utilization](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d-router/tree/main/pkg/epp/framework/plugins/scheduling/scorer/kvcacheutilization) and the [queue size](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d-router/tree/main/pkg/epp/framework/plugins/scheduling/scorer/queuedepth) scorers.

> An optional [calibration step](#4-optional-calibrate-prefix-cache-affinity-filter) is also available to add a saturation-aware override gate (the `prefix-cache-affinity-filter`) on top of the default plugins, with a per-deployment τ value measured against the live cluster. This is useful when sticky prefix-affinity routing under heavy load could create hot-pod imbalance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An optional [calibration step](#4-optional-calibrate-prefix-cache-affinity-filter) is also available to add a saturation-aware override gate (the `prefix-cache-affinity-filter`) on top of the default plugins, with a per-deployment τ value measured against the live cluster. This is useful when sticky prefix-affinity routing under heavy load could create hot-spotting.
```

### 3. (Optional) Enable monitoring

> [!NOTE]
> GKE provides [automatic application monitoring](https://docs.cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/configure-automatic-application-monitoring) out of the box. The llm-d [Monitoring stack](../../docs/monitoring/README.md) is not required for GKE, but it is available if you prefer to use it.

- Install the [Monitoring stack](../../docs/monitoring/README.md).
- Deploy the monitoring resources for this guide.

```bash
kubectl apply -n ${NAMESPACE} -k guides/recipes/modelserver/components/monitoring
```

### 4. (Optional) Calibrate `prefix-cache-affinity-filter`

> The guide ships with a static default for `maxTokensInFlightPenalty` (τ = 286720), calibrated for Qwen3-32B on H100 TP=2 at T_max=17s. This default works well for that reference setup but is not optimal for other hardware/model combinations:

Reviewer 2: See this effort: https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/issues/38147

What information can be exposed there, and then attached to the endpoint identity to fully automate calibration? vLLM already runs profiling on startup, we can expand it perhaps if info is missing.

Author: The cleanest will be: 
Endpoint: add peak_prefill_tokens_per_sec (+ the batch/seq-len assumptions it was measured under) to /v1/server/kv-cache or a runtime-data endpoint.
Measurement: hook a short timed prefill after warmup; gate behind a flag like --profile-prefill-throughput so default startup latency is unchanged.

however i am not sure if this belongs to core vLLM. Although it does warmup profile run, its pre cuda graphs  so is pessimistic. So i think any profiling should be done outside vLLM. We can estimate theoritical peak based on model sizes and hardware specs but that again is not something vLLM owns.

kubectl apply -n ${NAMESPACE} -k guides/recipes/modelserver/components/monitoring
```

> ### 4. (Optional) Calibrate prefix-cache-affinity-filter

Reviewer: A couple of comments:
- This adds a fair amount of complexity, which may well be needed, but what is the cost of not tuning this correctly?
- I think this needs to be a little less automated, the tool suggests a value and perhaps produces a helm values file, but lets not automatically apply that.

Author: * The cost is that if we use the same config for a bigger model 128b with the same hardware, or same model with a lower hardware like L4, it can lead to hot spot. Similarly if we use the same config for a smaller model (llama3) but with same hardware, or with same model but B200 the prefix caching will be suboptimal. 
* Yes I can make that change

Author: done

Reviewer: From this benchmarks it is not clear that adding this complexity is warranted, how can we show that it is worth it?

Author: agreed, i have not shown any evidence that this calibraiton is needed and will work for other models/hardware. Need to run benchmarks on a different hardware or model

Author: evaluated this workload on Llama-3-70B and same hardware (tp=2, 8 pods on H100). Because of the model's size, I adjusted the QPS range downwards to match our hardware capacity.  (pasting below for record). As you see the current default of $286,720$ shows higher TTFT compared to what the calibrated run of $140,394$ shows. This might not rigorously prove that the calibration value is perfectly optimal, but I think it signals that the tool is heading in the right direction.

<img width="704" height="628" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0bb81369-afc2-434a-8433-19825cb70f17" />

<img width="704" height="628" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/da289e59-967d-4b89-8620-ca34c510e850" />

<img width="704" height="628" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/20f371f9-af97-4d5f-b914-90269e6cfa29" />

      stages:
        # Warmup — seat residents (~1×S)
        - rate: 3
          duration: 250            # 15*50  = 750

        # Main ladder
        - rate: 1
          duration: 20
        - rate: 2
          duration: 20
        - rate: 3
          duration: 20
        - rate: 4
          duration: 38
        - rate: 5
          duration: 34
        - rate: 6
          duration: 30
        - rate: 7
          duration: 25
        - rate: 8
          duration: 21
        - rate: 9
          duration: 38
        - rate: 10
          duration: 36
        - rate: 11
          duration: 33
        - rate: 12
          duration: 30
        - rate: 13
          duration: 29
        - rate: 14
          duration: 27
        - rate: 15
          duration: 26
        - rate: 16
          duration: 25

Reviewer: I thought the agentic workload did show benefits; also, lets not use "legacy" models, try with gpt 120B

Author: for 120B we will need more GPUs  etc. which is okay but that may not be desirable for optimized-baseline setup for easy reproduction?

Reviewer 2: `gpt-oss-120b` can run on a single H100 with 150k tokens KV-cache. With 2 of them it can get to 1m.

Author: oh i see, i am surprised since its ~4 times bigger.  can you share reccommened deployment yaml of GPT OSS 120 on H100 if you have in handy i will try this there

Author: i tried gpt-0ss-120b with tp = 2, 8 H100 with the code-geenration workload and the results are infact consistent with what we saw with qwen-32. Current default is referred to as load+prefix scorer

<img width="1690" height="1560" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2170df16-2042-4f51-b512-e94e29f103cb" />

Author: For the gpt deployment a couple of tweaks i had to make to prevent OOM errors: 
           - "openai/gpt-oss-120b"
            - "--disable-access-log-for-endpoints=/health,/metrics,/v1/models"
            - "--tensor-parallel-size=2"
            # Cap concurrency: the sampler/activation warmup sizes itself to
            # max-num-seqs (default 1024), which OOMs on this memory-tight 120B
            # model. 256 frees that headroom without shrinking the KV cache.
            - "--max-num-seqs=256"
            # 0.90 (not 0.95): at 0.95 vLLM filled the budget with ~1.12M tokens of
            # KV cache, leaving only ~166Mi free — too little for the sampler/CUDA-graph
            # warmup that runs after (OOM by ~32Mi). 0.90 frees ~4Gi headroom while
            # still giving ~820k tokens of KV cache.
            - "--gpu-memory-utilization=0.90"

Reviewer: this is interesting, so roughly 135 concurrency for your benchmark is the pool saturation

Author: yes though the deployment yaml says 256 the tput kind of saturated at 135.

> This step adds the `prefix-cache-affinity-filter` plugin to the EPP scheduling pipeline, with its saturation-valve parameter `maxTokensInFlightPenalty` (τ) measured against your live deployment. With τ correctly tuned, sticky prefix-affinity routing keeps its TTFT benefits without creating hot-pod imbalance under high load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step adds the `prefix-cache-affinity-filter` plugin to the EPP scheduling pipeline, with its saturation-valve parameter `maxTokensInFlightPenalty` (τ) measured against your live deployment. With τ correctly tuned, sticky prefix-affinity routing keeps its TTFT benefits without creating hot-endpoint imbalance under high load.
```

| Metric              | k8s service (RR) | llm-d Optimized | Δ% vs k8s |
| :------------------ | :--------------- | :-------------- | :-------- |

> | Output tokens/sec   | 5,511            | 9,247           | +67.8%    |

Reviewer: there is a significant drop here for llm-d, why?

Author: The k8 runs are almost identical and any difference is due to run to run varaince. 
For llm-d, here is a comparison between old and new, we can probably further tune the threshold (TTFTPenalty) to match it but the idea is to keep it general enough that works for different scenarios. wdyt? : 
<img width="1789" height="628" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b5c49a37-3bf6-4d60-b069-b407800b856b" />
<img width="590" height="628" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/409cbd8e-fde2-4550-972a-0c61487c7731" />
<img width="1789" height="628" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ce6907c4-fce0-4f33-a8dc-9168d0db3ee1" />
One additional point, the data collected [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KonmVn5d4nJjg72dhWzcvpYYd8hFZO6G0oCRyCVjKLk/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.p2dtnj3m44at) is with and older deployemnt that did not have this [line](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d/blob/e3ed09a5918b9cc418723f87af18b09bb14efb28/guides/optimized-baseline/modelserver/gpu/vllm/base/patch-vllm.yaml#L17). Setting gpu max to 95% improved the older baseline little bit

> | Requests/sec        | 5.12             | 9.42            | +84.1%    |

Reviewer: this is completely different from the previous results, is this running a different set up compared to before?

Author: I think the Requests/sec summary was wrong before (it was a bug). @vMaroon i guess requests/sec in the summary table had a typo? I see the numbers much lower (I get them from the overall summary json file generated by inference perf)
